Can Dogs See in the Dark? Everything We Know About How Dogs See at Night
With many pet parents arriving home from work late in the evening, a daily dog walk late at night is common practice. It’s also not unheard of to leave the lights off when you’re not at home. But both scenarios mean your dog is navigating their way through the dark—either in low light or even complete darkness. So, this begs the question: Can dogs see in the dark?

While you might find yourself squinting during a late-night walk, dog experts believe that dog vision fares just fine in the dark. We reached out to veterinary ophthalmologists for more information on just how well dogs can see in the dark.

Do Dogs Have Night Vision?
The answer is as clear as day—or, in terms of dog vision, as clear as night. Yes, dogs can definitely see at night, as the unique structure of their eyes makes it possible to see in settings with dim light or other low-light conditions.

“Dogs are actually better able to see in low light compared to their human owners,” explains Dr. Kristin Fischer, DAVCO, a veterinary ophthalmologist at Animal Eye Care Associates of the Lowcountry in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. “The presence of increased rod photoreceptors in the retina and the reflective tapetum lucidum both enhance dogs’ ability to see at night.”

Increased Rod Photoreceptors
A dog’s eye contains more rods, or light-sensitive cells used for night vision, than it does cones, which detect a broader spectrum of light and are responsible for color vision. In fact, it’s estimated that a dog’s eye has one cone for every 20 rods. Rods are responsible for detecting movement, and with so many rods present in a dog’s eye, it’s not hard to see why dogs notice things that we don’t—especially in the dark. Dogs see even the smallest hint of movement rather than the finer details or the colors of an object.

Tapetum Lucidum
Similar to cats, dogs have a tapetum lucidum in their eyes, which also plays a significant role in their ability to see in low light.

“The tapetum is a structure in a part of the eye called the choroid, or the vascular layer of the eye, that is behind the retina,” explains Dr. Paola Cuevas, a veterinarian, MVZ and behaviorist with Hepper.com. “The tapetum is thought to act as a ‘mirror,’ reflecting light and images back to the photoreceptors (rods and cones) in the retina to amplify the signals sent to these cells, and thus, enhance the visual inputs.”

But calling it “night vision” isn’t exactly accurate, especially if you’re envisioning military-grade night-vision goggles. Despite the fact that the canine eye can see pretty well in low-light situations, this doesn’t mean it can see in pitch black or complete darkness.

“Both cats and dogs can see well in low-light conditions, and cats have an advantage even over dogs as their eyes’ anatomical structures allow them to make the most out of the little bit of light available,” explains Cuevas. “They need some light in order to see.”

How Your Dog's Eyes Are Different From Yours
Dog eyes are very similar to human eyes in terms of structure, how they interpret light, and how vision works.

Similar to humans, dogs have a cornea, which is the front part of the eye responsible for bending reflected light.They also have an iris and pupil, which regulate how much light enters the eye. The eyes of a dog also contain both rods and cones (like humans), but the main difference in their vision versus ours is that dogs have more rods than cones, and humans have more cones than rods.

Human eyes have three cones, enabling us to see the colors red, green and blue, which is known as trichromatic vision. In comparison, dogs have only two cones, resulting in dichromatic vision. This is often labeled as “color blind” for dogs, although a dog’s color perception is more complex than that.

Additionally, dogs have lower visual acuity than humans do, meaning they have a lesser ability to discern details. Generally, humans with perfect eyesight have 20/20 vision, while dogs are believed to have 20/75 vision. Better visual acuity allows humans to distinguish objects at a distance of 20 feet, whereas dogs need to be approximately 20 feet away from an object to see it as clearly as a human standing 75 feet away.